---
layout: post
title: Angular2 Learning Note
author: Kevin
---
# Angular 

## Why Angular 2
- Frameworks is for large scale JavaScript applications. 
- Angular 2 is easy. Simpler than Angular 1. 
- Written in typescript, a superset of JavaScript, which implements many ES6 features.
- Similarity from Angular 1
- Mobile oriented and better performance

##ES6 and TypeScript
ES6 transpile to ES5, TypeScript act as a transpiler. Here we talk about ES6 and type script.

## ES6 new features:
- Classes
- Arrow Functions
- Template String
- Inheritance
- Constants and Block Scoped Variables
- spread and rest
- Destructuring
- Modules

### Classes

	class SomeThing{
		constructur(){
			//
		}
		someMethods(){
			//
		}
	}

#### the keyword ``this``

this usually refer to the instance of the class. But there are times that  ``this`` refer to other things. 

1 The basic case **Method Invocation**: In ``someObject.someMethod()``, ``this`` in ``.someMethod`` refers to ``someObject``.

2 **Function Invocation**: In ``someFunction()``, this can refer to different things:
- In "strict" mode, ``this`` would be undefined
- Otherwise, ``this`` refers to the context where ``someFunction()`` is called.

##### Confusing Situation 1:

The following code will give an error. Because ``log`` is looking for ``console`` which is referred by ``this``.

	var log = console.log;
	log("something");

This can be solved by using ``.bind()`` like: ``var log = console.log.bind(console);``. Other solutions would be ``Function.call`` or ``function.apply``.

##### Confusing Situation 2:
Anonymous functions and functions declared within other functions. In strict mode, the following code will have ``this`` to be ``undefined``.

	class someClass{
		fun(){
			//
		}
		foo(){
			bar(function callback(err,data){
				this.fun();
				});
		}
	}

In ES6, the feature of arrow function resolves this problem. 

### Arrow Functions
Basically a new syntax for dealing with ``this``.
A simpler way of defining anonymous functions. *revisit anonymous functions*
Instead of:

	items.forEach(function(x){
		//do something with x, and
		
	})

We can do:

	items.forEach((x)=>{
		//do something with x
	})

Can be used with all kinds of call back. Like forEach, map, reduce.

**Major Difference** Arrow function does not set a local copy of `this`, `arguments`, `super`, `new.target`.
`new.target`, `this`, `super` in a arrow function is scoped from the outer enclosure, there is no `arguments` in arrow function. 

**What is** `arguments`, `super`, `new.target`

### Template String
Instead of using + to concat strings and variables, ES6 introduces back tick *`* and ${} to do this. like:
``

### Inheritance
In ES5, recommendation is avoid (deep) inheritance, try delegation instead. 
In Es6, classes provide a syntactic sugar attempting

### Constants and block scoped variables. 
 







### Constants and Block Scoped
ES6 introduce block scoping. In addition to `var`, we have `const` and `let`.
`var` still means local/in-function scope. Functions are containers that can see outside from inside, but not the reverse.
`const` and `let` use {} as containers. => block scope. like:

	{
		let ...;
	}

Block scoping is most used in loops. `let` is like var, `const` is read-only. 
The `const` cannot be reassigned but its properties still can alter. 


### spread ... and rest ...
`...` Which is **added in front of an variable**, can serve for two purposes: 

* one is to spread the content of an array or an object. 
* one is to stand for unknown number of arguments when declaring a function, change them into array. 

#### Spread ...
`...` stand for a few items (elements of array, or property of an object).
`...` can kind of remove the `[]` of array and `{}` of object. 
can be used in generating *function argument list* from an array, generating concatenating arrays/objects. 

	let args = [3,5];
	const add = (a,b) =>a + b;
	add(...args);


#### rest ...
Javascript already have a `arguments` variable for each function(except arrow function). The problem is `arguments` is not an array. 
While `...` is an array, and works like an normal argument. 

	function print(a,b,c,...more){
		;
	}


### Destructuring
Destructuring means extract data from {} or [] easily. 

	let foo = [1,2,3];
	let[ a,b,c] = foo;

	let myModule = {
		;
	}
	let { , } = myModule;

Allows you to pull specific properties out of an object, especially when passing them into a function:

	let jane = {firstName: 'Jane', lastName: 'Doe'};
	let john = {firstName: 'John'};
	function sayName({firstName, lastName = ''}){
		console.log('${firstName} ${lastName}');
	}
	sayName(jane);
	sayName(john);

More (sophisticated) examples please go to mdn. e.g. nested object destructuring, dynamic destructuring with `for ... in` 

### ES6 Modules
* Defining an ES6 module: each file is assumed to define a module and we specify its exported values using `export`
* Loading ES6 module: 
	+ use `System` in ES6 browser can load it asynchronously.
	+ Or use `SystemJS` as a polyfill. system.js 

## TypeScript

TypeScript is a superset of ES6, Typescript must be transpiled to ES5 in most browsers
One primary feature is the addition of **type information**


### Getting Started With TypeScript
Install TypeScript using npm, then use `tsc` to transpile.(See book or tutorial) 
TypeScript expects instance properties to be declared with a type. 

	property : string[];
	something: any;

### Working with `tsc`
Compile `.ts` to `.js`. Use of `--module` flag.
`tsconfig.json` let programmers write down all the compiler settings they want, and `tsc` uses it. Here are a few config items:

* `target`: usually "es5"
* `module`: specifies the target moule resolution interface, which we use `commonjs`
* `decorators` set true since angular 2 uses a lot
 Webpack?


### Typings
How does TypeScript interface JS modules with no type info.
`*.d.ts` files are definition files, which are meeant to use TypeScript to describe interfaces from javascript lib. 
A utility called `typings` can be used to manage third party typing. 

### Linting
`tslint` `tslint-loader`

### TypeScript Features
* Types
* Interfaces
* Shapes
* Decorators

#### Types
Javascript Types(programmer usually don't need to worry about)

* boolean
* number
* string
* []
* {}
* undefined
Typescript types
* enum
* any
* void
Examples:
* `let list: number[] = [1,2];`
* `enum Color {Red,Green,Blue};`

TypeScript support **optional parameters**:
`function func(message:string, opt_message?:string){;}`

#### TypeScript Classes
TypeScript also treat `class` as a type. `class` can have optional members. 
e.g. 

	class Foo { foo:number; name?:string;}
	class Bar {bar:string;}
	class Baz {
		constructor(foo: Foo, bar: Bar){}
	}
	let baz = new Baz(new Foo(), new Bar())

#### Interfaces
Two problems:

* Some times class is more than a programmer's need
* functions in JS are "first class", what about in TS?
**interface**
* Interfaces are abstract descriptions of things
* can be used to represent any non-primitive JS object.
* Produce no code, but exist to describe the types to tsc.
*Interesting example in book*.

#### Shapes 

####

##JavaScript ToolChain


### Git


###CommandLine


### NodeJS
Important tool for JavaScript Developers. 


### npm
`package.json` specifies module dependencies.

### Module Loading, Bundling and Build Tasks: Webpack
Webpack

* Takes modules with dependencies
* and generates static assets representing those modules
* bundle JS,CSS,HTML
* Can be extended via plugins, e.g. minification and mangling using UglifyJS plugin for webpack.


### Chrome

## Bootstraping an Angular 2 Application

