---
layout: post
title: MongoDB Quick Start
author: Kevin
---

# MongoDB Quick Start
This learning note follows the tutorial [MongoDB In 30 Minutes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pWbMrx5rVBE) on Youtube. 

## Set up
* Download and install
* make a few folders where you want to store your database
* and set the path to be used by mongodb:
    - `mongod --directoryperdb --path 'directory' --logpath 'logpath/mongo.log' --logappend --rest --install` installs the mongodb as a rest service
* Now we can run the service: `net start MongoDB`(This is for windows only). the MongoDB now can run on the background as a service. 
* type in `mongo` and you are in the mongoDB shell. 

## Usual commands
* `show dbs`: shows all the databases, don;t touch the default database `local`
* `use databasename`: creates a new database 
* `db` shows you the current database you are in.
* 
MongoDB use JSON format to interact with data. Can contain: string, number, array, objects, basically any normal data structure.
* to create a user:

        db.createUser({
            user:"username",
            pwd:"password",
            roles:["roles of the user"]
        });

* `db.createCollection('customers')` create a collection(table)
* `show collections` will show all the collections
* `db.customers.insert({one json like entry})`, note that 'customer'

Everytime a new entry is inserted, an id is assigned. 
* `db.customers.find()`
* `db.customers.find()。pretty()`
* `db.customers.update({first_name:"John"},{first_name:"John", last_name:"...", })`: replace an entry with a new entry, The ID does not change. The first parameter is used as a condition like `WHERE`. 
* How to update only one field(change/add/delete): Use operators : `$set`, `$inc`, `$unset`

    db.customers.update({condition},{$\$$set:{gender:"male"}})
    db.customers.update({condition},{$\$$inc:{age:5}})
    db.customers.update({first_name:"Steve"},{$\$$unset:{age}})
* `db.customers.update({first_name:"NoExistName"},{first_name:"NoExistName", last_name:"K",},{upsert:true}); ` we can add a new entry if it is not find.
* `db.customers.update({condition},{$rename:{"gender":"sex"});`: change attribute name
* `db.customer.remove({conditions},{justOne:true})`remove the matching entries, if `justOne` is not specified, all matches will be deleted. 
* `db.customers.find($or:[{condition one},{condition two}])` using logic operator.
* `$lt`,`$gt`,`$lte`,`$gte`: `db.customers.find({age:{$lt:40}}).pretty();`
* `db.customers.find({"address.city":"Boston"});` : using attribute of attribute(member of dictionary, which is also a member of a dictionary). **Note**: dontforget the quots in `"address.city"`.
* Last one queried a **Dictionary**, we can also query an **Array**. For example, every/some entries have attribute `membership` which is an array containing different kinds of memberships. we can do: `db.customers.find({{membership:"mem1"});`
* Sorting by some attribute: `db.customer.find().sort({last_name:1}).pretty()`. `1` for ascending, `-1` for descending.
* Count documents: `db.customers.find({conditions}).count();`
* Set limit: `db.customers.find({conditions}).limit(4).sort({last_name:1});`
* Iterate using `forEach`: `db.customers.find().forEach(function(doc){print(doc.first_name)});` this could call javascript function. 


